[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: I
[Amit Varma]: take a shot at answering all these questions and many more.
[Amit Varma]: I aim to go beyond the scene and show you all the unseen effects of public policy and
[Amit Varma]: private action.
[Amit Varma]: I speak to experts on Economics, Political Philosophy, Cognitive Neuroscience and Constitutional
[Amit Varma]: Law so that their insights can blow not only my mind, but also yours.
[Amit Varma]: The Seen and the Unseen releases every Monday.
[Amit Varma]: So do check out the archives and follow the show at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: You can also subscribe to The Seen and the Unseen on whatever podcast app you happen
[Amit Varma]: to prefer.
[Amit Varma]: And now, let's move on to the show.
[Amit Varma]: If Donald Trump saw the way I lived, he would be very worried.
[Amit Varma]: Here's what would worry him.
[Amit Varma]: My maidservant.
[Amit Varma]: There's a maidservant who works at my place, and she comes every morning to wash the dishes
[Amit Varma]: and do some household cleaning.
[Amit Varma]: We pay her a decent amount, something she's quite happy with, and we get along well.
[Amit Varma]: She has no complaints with my wife and me, and we like her work.
[Amit Varma]: However, if Donald Trump was my grouchy uncle, and if he was visiting for the weekend, he
[Amit Varma]: would have a problem with my maidservant.
[Amit Varma]: I can imagine what he would say.
[Amit Varma]: He would point out that while we buy the lady's housecleaning services month after month,
[Amit Varma]: she buys absolutely nothing from us.
[Amit Varma]: In other words, we are running a trade deficit with her.
[Amit Varma]: This is unfair, he would say.
[Amit Varma]: Either she should start buying things from us, as much as we buy from her, ideally, or
[Amit Varma]: we should stop buying her services and do the daily cleaning ourselves.
[Amit Varma]: I can totally imagine Trump shouting at me, you are being exploited, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Sad.
[Amit Varma]: But Trump would be wrong.
[Amit Varma]: Can you see why?
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Unknown]: Our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My intro to this episode was inspired by an article Tim Harford wrote in the Financial
[Amit Varma]: Times in 2005, titled, A Trade Deficit with a Babysitter.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I don't have a baby, so I Indianized it a little bit, and I don't need to tell
[Amit Varma]: you why it is absurd to think of a trade deficit with a maidservant as a problem.
[Amit Varma]: It is because all trade is a positive sum game.
[Amit Varma]: Both parties benefit.
[Amit Varma]: We get our housecleaning done at a rate we are happy to pay, our maidservant gets a remuneration
[Amit Varma]: for it that she is happy with, otherwise she wouldn't do the job in the first place.
[Amit Varma]: Both of us are better off.
[Amit Varma]: This is true even of trade between countries.
[Amit Varma]: And here's the thing, countries don't really trade with each other.
[Amit Varma]: People do.
[Amit Varma]: The US has a trade deficit with China, for example.
[Amit Varma]: But actually, it doesn't mean that the US as a nation is buying anything from China
[Amit Varma]: the nation.
[Amit Varma]: Individuals and corporations on both sides are trading with each other, and each trade
[Amit Varma]: leaves both parties better off.
[Amit Varma]: The value that is created or saved goes back into their respective economies.
[Amit Varma]: A trade deficit between countries is no more a bad thing than your trade deficit with your
[Amit Varma]: maidservant.
[Amit Varma]: And for this reason, protectionism is daft.
[Amit Varma]: This is just basic economics.
[Amit Varma]: Donald Trump disagrees, because he looks at the world in a zero-sum way.
[Amit Varma]: But I won't go into that in detail in this episode, because I already did a pretty exhaustive
[Amit Varma]: episode on protectionism a few weeks ago.
[Amit Varma]: Episode 59 of the Seen and the Unseen deals with protectionism, and my guest, the economist
[Amit Varma]: Anupam Manoor busted 8 common myths about protectionism.
[Amit Varma]: Check that out in the archives of the show at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Today though, I have a guest who will take us into another aspect of trade deficits and
[Amit Varma]: Donald Trump's protectionist urge, the monetary aspect.
[Amit Varma]: Vivek Kaul is my good friend and a frequent guest on this show, as well as the author
[Amit Varma]: of the outstanding Easy Money trilogy, which has just been re-released by HarperCollins.
[Amit Varma]: Many of the insights he will now share with us are from that book.
[Amit Varma]: But before I start my conversation with him, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If this happens to be the only podcast you listen to, well, you need to listen to some
[Amit Varma]: more.
[Amit Varma]: Check out the ones from IVM Podcast, who co-produced this show with me.
[Amit Varma]: Go to ivmpodcast.com or download the IVM app, and you'll find a host of great Indian podcasts
[Amit Varma]: that cover every subject you could think of.
[Amit Varma]: From the magazine I edit, Pragati, at thinkpragati.com, there is the Pragati podcast, hosted by Hamsini
[Amit Varma]: Hariharan and Pawan Srinath, there is a brilliant Hindi podcast, Puliyabazi, hosted by Pranay
[Amit Varma]: Koteswani and Saurabh Chandra, and apart from these policy podcasts, IVM has shows that
[Amit Varma]: cover music, films, finance, sports, sci-fi, tech, and the LGBT community, all under one
[Amit Varma]: roof, or rather, all in one app.
[Amit Varma]: So download the IVM podcast app today.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene in the unseen, Vivek.
[Guest]: Thanks Amit for having me over.
[Amit Varma]: Vivek, this is going to be a tougher episode for you than usual because I've started this
[Amit Varma]: new custom of, from the last episode, of asking my friends personal questions about themselves
[Amit Varma]: so that the listeners can get to know them a little better.
[Amit Varma]: So tell us a little bit about yourself, what's your background and how did you become a journalist?
[Guest]: Where do I see myself five years from now?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and how do you feel?
[Amit Varma]: Aap batayenge hain, aapke zahin mein abhi kya chal raha hai, no no, seriously.
[Guest]: So basically, you know, I did an MBA in information systems, and I worked for an IT company, I
[Guest]: was a project manager there, for all of 35 days.
[Guest]: So the first two weeks, it sort of took me to figure out that I didn't fit in.
[Guest]: The next two weeks, it took me to gather the courage to speak to my parents, primarily
[Guest]: my father, because he would have to continue, you know, financing me, and at the end of
[Guest]: the fifth week, I quit.
[Guest]: I just stopped going, in fact, I didn't even quit.
[Guest]: And then I tried doing a PhD for three years, and after that, I sort of landed up in journalism.
[Guest]: And that was also quite by chance because, you know, DNA had launched in Mumbai and they
[Guest]: needed a personal finance editor, and I just landed up and I got the job, even though I
[Guest]: didn't know anything about personal finance.
[Guest]: So that's how I sort of...
[Amit Varma]: And all the journalism that I've read of you, like I've been reading you for a few years,
[Amit Varma]: so perhaps not from when you started, and all of it has been economics journalism.
[Guest]: I mean, what you specifically...
[Guest]: Yes, so that economics essentially started once I went, you know, freelance.
[Guest]: That was primarily because one is it, you know, allows you to sort of write on a wide
[Guest]: array of topics.
[Guest]: So you can make more money.
[Guest]: Personal finance, what happens is, you know, after you've done it for a couple of years,
[Guest]: I mean, you're done, there's nothing more to it.
[Guest]: In fact, a couple of years, there's this great story about Scott Adams, the creator of Dilbert.
[Guest]: He once decided that he wanted to write a book on personal finance.
[Guest]: And then he figured out that all of personal finance could be summarized in 87 words.
[Guest]: So he gave up on the idea.
[Guest]: So you know, once you know that these are the four or five things you need to generally
[Guest]: do in order to manage your finances, after that it is, you're just rehashing, you know,
[Guest]: the same thing day in, day out.
[Guest]: And you can probably rehash for two to three years, beyond that, it's a little difficult.
[Guest]: So you know, by 2007, 2008, I had already started, you know, writing more on economics
[Guest]: and management and, you know, personal finance had taken a backseat.
[Guest]: And once I went freelance in 2012, economics became the main breadwinner.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, there are plenty of economics journalists in the country, but one sort of
[Amit Varma]: niche which you've almost made your own and one reason, in fact, why you're such an excellent
[Amit Varma]: guest for the show, and I keep calling you here, is that you like to explain complicated
[Amit Varma]: economic fundas in simple language, which your grandmother can understand, or your mother,
[Amit Varma]: as you said in an interview recently, was it like that from the beginning, or did you
[Amit Varma]: at some point while engaging with your readers?
[Guest]: No, actually, what, see, what happens is, and this is from the benefit of hindsight,
[Guest]: you know, when you when you, so I never studied economics, okay, I mean, I've never went,
[Guest]: I mean, I've never gone to a, you know, college where, you know, I studied economics, my only
[Guest]: exposure to economics was when I was doing my MBA, where, you know, in any standard MBA
[Guest]: course, has one subject, you know, one paper on microeconomics, and one paper on macroeconomics.
[Guest]: And that is, you know, you don't really learn much there, because, you know, my MBA at the
[Guest]: end had 72 subjects.
[Guest]: So two out of those 72, you really don't learn anything.
[Guest]: So once, so when I first started writing economics, and this was for rediff, actually, and sometime
[Guest]: in late 2003, early 2004, when I first started writing economics, it was more of an act of
[Guest]: trying to understand things myself, okay.
[Guest]: And that sort of state.
[Guest]: So you know, what has happened over the years is that,
[Amit Varma]: So in a sense, the older Vivek today is writing for the younger Vivek, who's just learning
[Amit Varma]: the subject.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, I mean, you could say that, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And since you're self-taught, in a sense, you're an autodidact to use that term in economics.
[Amit Varma]: Who are the writers which impressed you the most?
[Amit Varma]: And which are the books which you felt were most useful in sort of bringing about quantum
[Amit Varma]: leaps in your understanding, for example?
[Guest]: Okay, so you know, my problem is, I don't remember much of what I read.
[Guest]: So I mean, I'll sort of some of the books that, in fact, an early book that I read,
[Guest]: and I quite liked it, was a textbook by C. Rangarajan and Bakul Dholokia.
[Guest]: And they wrote this book in 1979, when Mr. Rangarajan was still teaching at IIM Ahmedabad.
[Guest]: And that was just one edition of that book that ever appeared.
[Guest]: And you know, for the next 25 years, 30 years, they just kept republishing it.
[Guest]: So I learned all the basic economics there, you know, what is GDP, what is fiscal deficit,
[Guest]: how is GDP defined, you know, the basic very, you know, what is current account deficit,
[Guest]: what is trade deficit, and it was a brilliant book.
[Guest]: The tragedy is, I lost my copy, and I've never been able to find it again, because I think
[Guest]: it's out of print.
[Amit Varma]: So that was...
[Guest]: So if any of the listeners have an old copy of the book, you can do a good deed to the
[Guest]: world.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So that was one book that really sort of, then there have been a lot of, you know, I
[Guest]: think Tim Harford writes economics in a very, very approachable way.
[Guest]: His books have really been great.
[Guest]: Of late, I've been reading Thomas Sowell.
[Guest]: I mean, his books are just fantastic, because, you know, what he does is, and what is actually
[Guest]: missing from most economics textbooks is that he relates economics to politics, society
[Guest]: and everyday life.
[Guest]: And there, you know, I mean, I find it very, very funny that, you know, economics actually
[Guest]: gets taught in colleges without being related to, you know, the society and the politics
[Amit Varma]: at large.
[Amit Varma]: Thomas Sowell, for me, is one of the finest thinkers of the last century.
[Amit Varma]: And even speaking in terms of textbooks, I think his two books, Basic Economics and Applied
[Guest]: Economics are both fantastic, in the sense that, you know, anyone can pick up and start
[Guest]: reading it.
[Guest]: There are no graphs, there is no math.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And it's not that, you know, personally, I don't have a problem with math and graphs,
[Unknown]: but it does put off a lot of people.
[Guest]: And it's just fantastic.
[Guest]: In fact, before I came here, I was reading, you know, Basic Economics, and that's a book
[Guest]: I sort of keep going back to because it just explains things in a very, very practical
[Guest]: sort of way.
[Guest]: So, Thomas Sowell, you know, anyone who wants to learn economics and does not want to take
[Guest]: a full course or spend two years or three years in college, it's by far the best.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, if I may give a recommendation to my listeners, another textbook, which is really
[Amit Varma]: good is Tyler Carvin and Alex Tabarrok's textbook on macroeconomics and microeconomics.
[Amit Varma]: And they also have great video courses at Marginal Revolution University.
[Amit Varma]: So check that out.
[Amit Varma]: Those are just wonderful.
[Amit Varma]: Now, on Twitter, I promised your readers and my readers as well, that I would make you
[Amit Varma]: reveal something about yourself that no one in the world knows.
[Guest]: This is the first time people will come to know.
[Guest]: I mean, it's very difficult to come up with something, you know, which no one in the world
[Amit Varma]: knows.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, let's say maybe your parents or your loved ones might know something, but the world
[Amit Varma]: at large would be surprised by this saying, really, Vivek likes wearing lingerie?
[Guest]: You know, something like that.
[Guest]: No, I mean, I'm not.
[Guest]: So you know, lingerie reminds me of an old story.
[Guest]: And this was, I think, sometime 2007 or 2008 or 2009, maybe.
[Guest]: And, and my grandfather asked my sister, in a very roundabout manner, which took my sister
[Guest]: some time to figure out as to, you know, what did he really mean by what he said.
[Guest]: And he basically asked her, kya isko ladkiya pasand nahi hai, which essentially, you know,
[Guest]: it was his way of asking whether, you know, I'm gay, so.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, I won't ask you what the answer was, but most eligible bachelor in town, ladies,
[Amit Varma]: if you're listening.
[Guest]: No, so the point is, so yeah, so the larger point is, yeah, I mean, so I was just taking,
[Guest]: you know, your lingerie point, right?
[Guest]: Or, you know, as we Indians call it, lingerie.
[Amit Varma]: That's not a roundabout revelation that I asked for, right?
[Guest]: I'll give you a sort of, you know, something that I mean, I mean, I have not, I mean, people
[Guest]: know this, you know, I am extremely fascinated by crime fiction.
[Guest]: I mean, I read practically, you know, I live to read crime fiction.
[Guest]: And over the long run, you know, if ever I reach a stage in life where I have some amount
[Guest]: of f**k you money, I mean, I want to write a crime fiction book, so, which is an ambition
[Guest]: I share as well.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah.
[Guest]: So that is, yeah, I guess we can write a crime fiction book.
[Guest]: We can, sorry?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, we can sit in.
[Unknown]: No, I mean.
[Guest]: The problem with, you know, the only problem I think is, you know, the plotting etc. is
[Guest]: not a problem.
[Guest]: The problem is that, you know, in a city like Bombay, Mumbai, or in any city in India, how
[Guest]: do you figure out the procedure, part of how, you know, crime gets investigated?
[Amit Varma]: Because, you know, we don't know, I mean, there is nothing really...
[Guest]: But a senior journalist at your level can just get in touch with a cop and say, yeah.
[Guest]: It's very difficult, yeah.
[Guest]: I mean, so what happens is, so I know someone who was sort of writing a crime fiction book,
[Guest]: and so she did approach, you know, some senior police guy in Bombay, and so that guy's condition
[Guest]: was that he also, you know, wanted his name on the book.
[Amit Varma]: So it's not so...
[Amit Varma]: That's pretty bizarre.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's pretty bizarre.
[Guest]: So it's not so straightforward, yeah.
[Guest]: She should put his name on the book just to reveal it to the world, this is the guy.
[Guest]: Or what one could do is, you know, and there are books like that, I mean, if you read the
[Guest]: Scandinavian crime fiction, you know, especially a guy like Henning Mankal, even though his
[Guest]: books are, you know, the main character, Kurt Wallander, is a chief inspector, he doesn't
[Guest]: really get into a lot of procedures.
[Guest]: I mean, there's basic shooting, and you know, this gun, that gun, and you know, this is
[Guest]: where the bullet was, and all that's there.
[Guest]: But it's more about plotting, and it's more about how Sweden has changed over the years,
[Guest]: and the politics, you know, of the country and the weather, and it's just...
[Amit Varma]: So you'd do a Bombay analogue of that, if you were to do something.
[Guest]: In fact, you know, the bizarre thing is, there is no crime fiction set in Bombay.
[Guest]: I mean, and this is a city that can give you stories dime a dozen.
[Guest]: And this is a city which actually has so many crime reporters.
[Guest]: And so many stories.
[Amit Varma]: It's mad.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And it's so...
[Guest]: I mean, I mean, actually, crime reporters are by far the best guys, you know, when it
[Guest]: comes to writing crime fiction.
[Guest]: I guess the problem in India is that a lot of crime reporters, even though they're very
[Guest]: good reporters, they can't write, you know, so ultimately, they get the story and someone
[Guest]: they tell the story, and there is a guy sitting and the desk guy in the newspaper actually
[Guest]: writes out the story.
[Guest]: So even though they may have the stories, they don't have the ability to...
[Amit Varma]: And I mean, half of any narrative, like a narrative is really either taking a story
[Amit Varma]: forward or revealing character.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess a crime reporter would be good at finding out the facts of a story and doing
[Amit Varma]: that part of it.
[Amit Varma]: But the other half, which is revealing character and going into the depths of human nature...
[Guest]: In fact, a few years back, you know, Indian Express did a fascinating story on a police
[Guest]: inspector who has retired, and he cannot let go of a case of a girl who disappeared.
[Guest]: Now, this is just it's such an exciting plot point.
[Guest]: I mean, you can just start there and then let your imagination flow.
[Guest]: I'm already imagining the back cover of your next book.
[Guest]: So I mean, I'm just saying, I mean, it's just, I mean, the city has so many stories which
[Amit Varma]: are not being told.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, given that you often write about Mr. Modi's economic policies, one could
[Amit Varma]: say you're writing crime nonfiction.
[Amit Varma]: But just moving on from there, now that you've made this splendid revelation and our respective
[Amit Varma]: Twitter followers should be pleased by it, let's move on to the subject at hand.
[Amit Varma]: You mentioned Scott Adams earlier, and when we just came to the studio, I saw you reading
[Amit Varma]: a book by Adams Outside and Adams, of course, writes a brilliant cartoon strip, Dilbert,
[Amit Varma]: but was surprisingly for a lot of people, disappointingly for a lot of people, a big
[Amit Varma]: early supporter of Donald Trump.
[Guest]: No, I mean, so, you know, this is a huge misconception that people have.
[Guest]: I don't think he was he was a supporter, you know, of either Hillary or Donald Trump.
[Guest]: He basically called the election right early enough.
[Guest]: And he just, you know, he doubled up and he kept going on and on about how Trump will
[Guest]: win.
[Amit Varma]: And that essentially sort of was...
[Amit Varma]: People thought, oh, he must be a Trump supporter.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, you know, it's like, you know, in India, now people are talking about the
[Guest]: fact that in 2019, there is no option, the Tina factor to Modi.
[Guest]: But you know, you there is always an option, you and me may not like that option.
[Guest]: So I think the situation that Scott Adams was in was very, very similar.
[Guest]: I mean, he sort of called the election very early.
[Guest]: And he just stood by it and people did not and I mean, the media by large, especially
[Guest]: the New York based media, which is liberal did not like that.
[Amit Varma]: So why I bought Adams up was to seek seamlessly to the subject of Trump, and to the subject
[Amit Varma]: of Trump's vision of the world, which is where, in a sense, our talk about today's episode
[Amit Varma]: comes from, because it seems that he doesn't understand any of the things that you've written
[Amit Varma]: in your book, Easy Money, obviously, but also that his insular view of the world that is
[Amit Varma]: immigrants are bad trade with other countries is bad.
[Amit Varma]: It's just fundamentally flawed.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you know, I've given one basic at the start of this episode, one basic economic
[Amit Varma]: point of view about why his fulmination against trade deficits are misguided, because I actually
[Amit Varma]: think trade deficits aren't a bad thing at all.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it's just it's trade benefits everybody, both parties, but you've outlined a somewhat
[Amit Varma]: deeper monetarist view in your Easy Money trilogy, specifically the third book, the
[Amit Varma]: second last chapter, where you deal explicitly with this and you give historical parallels
[Amit Varma]: as well.
[Guest]: So can you outline some of this?
[Guest]: So basically, you know, the first thing we need to realize is as to why is Trump doing
[Guest]: what he's doing?
[Guest]: I mean, you know, at a superficial level, it seems bizarre, but actually it isn't because
[Guest]: he's just catering to his audience.
[Guest]: So when Trump's campaign started, his slogan was, make America great again.
[Guest]: And the funny thing is that this was not an original slogan at all, because in 1980, Ronald
[Guest]: Reagan had run on the slogan, let's make America great again.
[Amit Varma]: So Trump simply just dropped one word.
[Amit Varma]: Reagan, of course, a very different kind of leader and he meant very different things
[Guest]: by it.
[Guest]: He was almost the opposite of what Trump is trying to do.
[Guest]: So now, you know, why did Trump come up with a slogan like, you know, make America great
[Guest]: again?
[Guest]: And this essentially, the answer to this question lies in the fact that, you know, during the
[Guest]: heydays of the manufacturing boom in the United States, there were factories all over the
[Guest]: country and primarily, you know, what is called middle America.
[Guest]: And these factories gradually sort of, you know, came to a stop and many white male Americans
[Guest]: lost their jobs.
[Guest]: Now, Trump is essentially catering to this audience and, you know, when someone loses
[Guest]: a job, at least in, you know, developed democracies, they have an unemployment alliance and there
[Guest]: are many other facilities which are available.
[Guest]: But at the end of the day, it's sort of, you know, not having a proper job hurts you personally.
[Guest]: So I just like to quote something, you know, from a book called The Wealth of Humans, written
[Guest]: by a gentleman called Ryan Avent.
[Guest]: And in this, he says, work is not just the means by which we obtain resources needed
[Guest]: to put food on the table.
[Guest]: It is also a source of personal identity.
[Guest]: It helps give structure to our days and our lives.
[Guest]: It offers the possibility of personal fulfillment that comes from being of use to others and
[Guest]: is a critical part of the glue that holds society together and smooths its operation.
[Guest]: So basically what has happened is, you know, all these Americans who have lost jobs over
[Guest]: the years have essentially started to think or rather, you know, have been thinking for
[Guest]: a while that it's the Chinese and the other foreign countries which have taken their jobs.
[Guest]: So this is essentially the perception that prevails and, you know, perception is reality.
[Guest]: And Trump has essentially played on this perception.
[Guest]: So when he says that, you know, make America great again, what he essentially meant was
[Guest]: that, you know, all these factories which are flourishing, you know, up until the 80s
[Guest]: and the 90s will come back and, you know, the average American who's lost his job will
[Guest]: find a job all over again.
[Guest]: Now, there are a couple of points here which, you know, we need to understand.
[Guest]: You know, one is that have, you know, the Americans lost their jobs only due to the
[Guest]: Chinese and, you know, other countries like, you know, Bangladesh, Vietnam, Thailand, Indonesia
[Guest]: producing goods cheaply than America does?
[Guest]: The answer is yes and no.
[Guest]: So what has also happened is that the productivity of the American worker has increased over
[Guest]: the years.
[Guest]: And there's some research carried out by an economist called Michael Hicks, who writes
[Guest]: that almost 88% of job losses in manufacturing in America in recent years can be attributed
[Guest]: to productivity growth of American factories.
[Guest]: Now, in simple terms, what it basically means is that an average American worker is producing
[Guest]: more goods while working in a factory than he did in the past, okay.
[Guest]: And this is because of advances made in automation and IT.
[Guest]: It has also led to the need for fewer factories carrying out manufacturing.
[Guest]: Now, one of the data points that Hicks gives is that if the productivity levels of 2000
[Guest]: had prevailed in 2010, US would have required 20.9 million manufacturing workers.
[Guest]: Instead, the American factories employed only 12.1 million individuals.
[Guest]: So obviously, there is a gap of close to, you know, 9 million jobs.
[Guest]: So you know, one reason that why America has lost jobs is because productivity has improved.
[Guest]: And obviously, given the fact that, you know, other countries can produce things cheaply
[Guest]: than America can, I mean, has had an impact.
[Guest]: So Trump has essentially, you know, sort of feeded into this sentiment.
[Guest]: And, you know, one of the things that he said early enough was that he'll try and shrink
[Guest]: the American trade deficit.
[Guest]: Now, what does that mean?
[Guest]: You know, trade deficit, a country runs a trade deficit, essentially, when its imports
[Guest]: are more than its exports.
[Guest]: So what Trump basically wanted to say was that he'll sort of try shrinking American
[Guest]: imports.
[Guest]: How do you shrink American imports?
[Guest]: You shrink American imports by basically encouraging protectionism so that, you know, Americans
[Guest]: are not able to import goods from other countries.
[Guest]: And that essentially leads to a situation where, you know, the American companies become
[Guest]: competitive and they produce goods, which Americans can then buy.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, I wrote a column when Trump was running pointing out that he had one thing
[Amit Varma]: in common with a lot of populist demagogues, which is that he tended to come up with simple,
[Amit Varma]: easy to understand answers to complex questions, which actually only had complex answers.
[Amit Varma]: So for example, his answer to the question of where are the jobs in Middle America going
[Amit Varma]: was twofold.
[Amit Varma]: One is that your jobs are being shipped out.
[Amit Varma]: And the other was that immigrants are coming and taking your job.
[Amit Varma]: So therefore, his anti-immigrant and anti-free trade kind of line, both of which are absolutely
[Amit Varma]: wrong.
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to now ask you to obviously to expand on the trade deficit.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Unknown]: Hey, it's been a great week on IVM Podcast.
[Unknown]: If you're not following us on social media, please make sure you are.
[Unknown]: We are IVM Podcast on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram.
[Unknown]: This week on Keeping It Queer, Naveen talks to prominent author Devdutt Patnaik to explore
[Unknown]: queerness as depicted in Indian mythology.
[Unknown]: On Cyrus Says, Cyrus meets the film critic and writer Rajasthan and the duo quickly descend
[Unknown]: into a whirlwind of movie references.
[Unknown]: On LBB, catch a fun event in Delhi happening soon and a contest lined up for you on the
[Unknown]: LBB I Found Awesome podcast.
[Unknown]: On Hustle Science, hosts Ranveer and Tejaswin talk to entrepreneur Pranav Marwa from Thinkubate
[Unknown]: about his journey.
[Unknown]: Also, if you missed last week, make sure you catch Sahil Kattar on their first episode.
[Unknown]: That was a great show.
[Unknown]: On Paisa Vesa, if you missed last week's episode, we had a fun back to school special episode
[Unknown]: with a bunch of really smart 10 year olds who asked Anupam questions about inflation,
[Unknown]: taxes and more.
[Unknown]: Try and listen to as many of these shows as you can.
[Unknown]: And now on to your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm talking trade deficits with Vivek Kaul, that is I'm not talking about my trade deficits
[Amit Varma]: with Vivek Kaul because I have none.
[Amit Varma]: But America's trade deficit with China.
[Guest]: Yeah, so America runs a trade deficit of around, you know, 552 billion dollars.
[Guest]: I mean, that was the trade deficit in 2017.
[Guest]: And in 2016, it was around 500 billion.
[Guest]: So basically, within a period of one year, it went up by around 10%.
[Guest]: Now, what does that mean?
[Guest]: It essentially means that the total imports of America are greater than the total exports
[Guest]: of America by 552 billion dollars.
[Guest]: Now, what does Trump propose to do about it?
[Guest]: And so, you know, this is something that Peter Navarro, an economist who served as a policy
[Guest]: advisor to Trump's electoral campaign, and I think perhaps continues to be associated
[Guest]: with him, I'm not sure of that, because so many people keep, you know, leaving the Trump
[Amit Varma]: administration and it's not possibly, you know, being in India, it's not possible to
[Amit Varma]: keep track of.
[Amit Varma]: It's my dream to see you as Trump's senior advisor one day.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So Trump essentially, so this is something that, you know, Peter Navarro says Trump proposes
[Guest]: eliminating America's trade deficit through a combination of increased exports and reduced
[Guest]: imports.
[Guest]: The idea is to manufacture more stuff in the US, bring down imports and increase exports.
[Guest]: In the process, more jobs will be created for America and Americans.
[Guest]: And this will make America great again, you know, QED, as you said, simple solutions to
[Unknown]: complex problems.
[Guest]: And in fact, his website, this is Donald Trump's website, puts it, he plans to direct the Secretary
[Guest]: of Commerce to identify every violation of trade agreements of foreign countries currently
[Guest]: using to harm our workers and also direct all appropriate agencies to use every tool
[Guest]: under American and international law to end these abuses.
[Guest]: So again, you know, simple things that will sort of put tariffs on goods from abroad,
[Guest]: you know, and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: The problem is that what people don't understand is that if you look at American imports and
[Guest]: American exports, they move almost in a parallel line.
[Guest]: I mean, even though there is a gap between them, if you were to plot out, you know, the
[Guest]: imports and the exports of America over the years, you would get two curves, which are
[Guest]: almost moving.
[Amit Varma]: So there's a positive correlation.
[Guest]: In fact, if you were to sort of put it in slightly, you know, complex terms, the curves
[Guest]: have a correlation of close to one.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Now, what does that essentially mean?
[Guest]: Now, it basically means that dollars earned by the countries which export goods and services
[Guest]: to the United States, which is essentially the imports of U.S., are used to buy goods
[Guest]: and services being exported by the U.S.
[Guest]: So the imports and the exports are very closely linked.
[Guest]: So the moment you crack down on American imports, the other countries, the money that they make
[Guest]: will come down in the process.
[Guest]: So they will have lesser money to buy goods and services being exported by the U.S.
[Guest]: So Trump's view of, you know, simplistic view of sort of decreasing imports and increasing
[Guest]: exports wouldn't work.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And it would also create a lot of problems globally.
[Amit Varma]: But I would actually assume that that even if dollars won the universal currency of trade,
[Amit Varma]: so to say, that same correlation would still be there simply because trade is a positive
[Guest]: sum game, both sides are benefiting, and therefore, if you cut down on trade, both sides lose
[Amit Varma]: that value.
[Amit Varma]: So even if he stopped buying from the Chinese, they'll have less money to buy from us.
[Guest]: So in any case, there'll be a correlation.
[Guest]: So I mean, forget dollar, I mean, you know, even let's say if trade was happening in gold
[Guest]: or, you know, currencies convertible into gold, anything, the same, you know, thing
[Guest]: would result.
[Guest]: Now, you know, other than impacting America, this would also impact the global economy
[Guest]: in a big way.
[Guest]: And I just like to quote something that an economist named Richard Duncan, you know,
[Guest]: has been talking about over the years.
[Guest]: What he says is that over the past 35 years, the deficit, which is basically the American
[Guest]: trade deficit, has become the driver of global economic growth.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So what will happen if Trump makes it difficult for the United States to import stuff from
[Guest]: China and other parts of the world?
[Guest]: If the American imports decline, so will its exports, primarily because other countries,
[Guest]: as you know, said, we said, won't have the dollars required to import stuff from the
[Guest]: US.
[Guest]: Also, with both imports, as well as export shrinking, the trade deficit may not reduce,
[Amit Varma]: right?
[Amit Varma]: In percentage terms, it might just stay the same.
[Guest]: So even in non percentage terms, I mean, both your, you know, exports and imports fall by
[Guest]: the same amount, your trade deficit stays the same, which mind you, I mean, our case
[Amit Varma]: completely is that the trade deficit doesn't matter.
[Amit Varma]: It's not a bad thing.
[Amit Varma]: But even if you happen to assume that it does matter, and you're sitting in Trump's shoes,
[Amit Varma]: this actually won't affect it at all.
[Amit Varma]: So it's ineptitude upon ineptitude, basically.
[Guest]: Now, further a fall in American imports will mean a fall in global demand.
[Guest]: And in the process, the global economy will shrink.
[Guest]: Now, how will this play out?
[Guest]: Now, Duncan essentially says that any attempt to eliminate the American trade deficit could
[Guest]: easily cause major problems for the global economy leading to another Great Depression.
[Guest]: Things could go particularly bad for China.
[Guest]: Now, in 2015, the US ran a trade deficit of $367 billion with China.
[Guest]: I think in 2017, the number was close to around $336 billion.
[Guest]: So this essentially means a trade deficit of $1 billion per day, roughly.
[Guest]: Now, if this deficit is eliminated, you know, the Chinese economy will sort of collapse.
[Guest]: If China collapses, economies of China's major trading partners will be severely impacted.
[Guest]: When China exports less, it also imports less, largely because it will have fewer dollars
[Guest]: to pay for imports.
[Guest]: Now, this will lead to the Chinese import of commodities from all over the world falling.
[Guest]: This can have a huge impact on commodity exporting countries like Australia and Brazil, to name
[Guest]: a few.
[Guest]: Now, Duncan also says that this could lead to social instability in China, threatening
[Guest]: the rule of the Communist Party, and even military conflict between China and its neighbors
[Guest]: and the US, possibly.
[Guest]: The response from China could be like the way Japan responded at Pearl Harbor after
[Guest]: the United States imposed oil embargo on the country in 1941.
[Guest]: So the point is that, you know, the US imports have sort of become, you know, a very important
[Guest]: factor in global demand.
[Guest]: And if those imports are cracked down on, it will impact global demand everywhere.
[Guest]: And once you know that happens, it could lead to political repercussions.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and you know, I'd also sum it up simply by saying that, once you understand that trade
[Amit Varma]: is a positive sum game, and if there's a given state of trade happening between US and China,
[Amit Varma]: by cutting it down, you're effectively creating a negative sum game where both sides lose
[Amit Varma]: value.
[Amit Varma]: And because these are two giant economies, and the whole of the world is so dependent
[Amit Varma]: on these two, it's going to have a ripple effect.
[Amit Varma]: And it's even simplistic to say that China will be the loser here.
[Amit Varma]: If China loses, we all lose, if America loses, we all lose, if Pakistan loses, we all lose.
[Amit Varma]: In terms of trade, if anyone is worse off, we are all worse off because the world is
[Guest]: interlinked.
[Amit Varma]: You're right.
[Amit Varma]: So Vivek, before the show started, when I asked you what you do to entertain yourself,
[Amit Varma]: you said you spend a lot of time on Donald Trump's Twitter feed.
[Amit Varma]: Give me an update what's going on, man.
[Guest]: So you know, talking about tweets, Donald Trump recently sent out two tweets.
[Guest]: One was against Canada, and there's another one, which we'll talk about later.
[Guest]: So he essentially, you know, in this tweet said, fair trade is now to be called fool
[Guest]: trade if it is not reciprocal.
[Guest]: According to a Canada release, they make almost $100 billion in trade with the US.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I don't know what he meant.
[Amit Varma]: It was pretty bizarre.
[Amit Varma]: I don't think he knew.
[Guest]: He knows what he meant.
[Guest]: So what I, you know, once I sort of saw this tweet, I went looking for numbers.
[Guest]: And very, very surprisingly, what I found was that the United States runs a trade surplus
[Guest]: of 8.4 billion with Canada.
[Guest]: What it basically means is that the American exports to Canada are greater than the American
[Guest]: imports from Canada.
[Amit Varma]: So therefore, by Trump's logic, which we disagree with, if China is screwing America, America
[Guest]: is screwing Canada.
[Guest]: Canada.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And any more than that, you know, when you're running a trade surplus with a country, why
[Guest]: are you even complaining?
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, if you're running a trade deficit also, why are you even complaining?
[Guest]: No, I mean, that's a different thing.
[Guest]: But I'm just talking from, you know, Trump's logic.
[Amit Varma]: If a guy thinks the deficit is bad, why would he think a surplus is also bad?
[Guest]: So, you know, and interestingly, so again, I mean, I looked, once I started looking at
[Amit Varma]: numbers...
[Amit Varma]: I think Justin Trudeau is not macho enough for him.
[Amit Varma]: He's too metrosexual.
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, that's why Trump likes Kim, big authoritarian dude.
[Guest]: He's like, he likes these macho guys who will go people executing like that.
[Guest]: So there's this photograph going around, I mean, obviously, it's photoshopped, where...
[Guest]: All photographs are photoshopped.
[Guest]: These days, yes, all photographs are photoshopped.
[Guest]: So I mean, so there's this picture going around in which you have Donald Trump marrying Kim.
[Guest]: So anyway, so sort of, you know, I started digging, you know, a little more and realized
[Guest]: that the United States actually runs a trade deficit with Canada when it comes to goods.
[Guest]: The trade deficit is around $17 billion.
[Guest]: But when it comes to services, because, you know, America has, you know, big banks and
[Guest]: a lot of Canadian tourists actually come to America and spend money.
[Guest]: America runs a trade surplus with Canada when it comes to services.
[Guest]: And that surplus is around $25.4 billion.
[Guest]: And hence, net-net, the overall surplus is around $8.4 billion.
[Guest]: So the first question is, why is Trump even, you know, what is he complaining about when
[Guest]: you know, the second thing is that obviously, you know, given the fact that on the whole
[Guest]: America runs a trade deficit, examples like Canada are there.
[Guest]: In fact, if you look at the American trade deficit, China accounts for nearly three fourths
[Amit Varma]: of it.
[Amit Varma]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Guest]: So it was much less a few years ago.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So it's it's sort of gone up from around 22% in 2000 to around almost 75% now, which is
[Amit Varma]: a sign of China's growing manufacturing might and you know, which if not for our labor laws
[Amit Varma]: and our law, you know, mad regulations, we could have had part of that.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So the larger point here is that, you know, there's no point bullying Canada, right?
[Guest]: If you have to bully, bully China.
[Amit Varma]: So he's wasting his time on Canada.
[Amit Varma]: I think he must have opened Melania's laptop and found a folder there called Justin.
[Guest]: That must have started him off.
[Guest]: I'm sorry.
[Guest]: Continue.
[Guest]: That was a bad joke.
[Guest]: So, so if you look at the American trade with China, America runs a trade deficit of $376
[Guest]: billion when it comes to goods, but it runs a surplus of $40 billion when it comes to
[Guest]: services.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Guest]: So services are for America's doing pretty good.
[Guest]: It is, you know, it is by far, you know, the most innovative country in the world.
[Guest]: So now the point is, you know, the point that I want to make here is that, you know, most
[Guest]: of the global trade happens in terms of dollars.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And I have a number here.
[Guest]: I think, let me just look it up.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So this is something from a book called The Scandal of Money, in which George Gilder,
[Guest]: who's the author says, today, the dollar handles more than 60% of the world trade, denominates
[Guest]: more than half of the market capitalization of world stocks, and partakes in 87% of global
[Guest]: currency trades.
[Guest]: So given the fact that most, you know, global trade is happening in dollars, countries end
[Guest]: up with dollars, right?
[Guest]: You know, when they trade, they end up with dollars.
[Guest]: And what do they do with these dollars?
[Guest]: I mean, when you export, you earn dollars, and then you use those dollars to pay for
[Guest]: imports.
[Guest]: Beyond that, there is still, you know, countries like China's, because their imports are significantly
[Guest]: lower than their exports, they end up with surplus dollars.
[Amit Varma]: What would you do if it was the other way around?
[Amit Varma]: Would you buy dollars from the market?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Basically.
[Guest]: Or there would be capital coming in, right, which would take care of, which is why, you
[Guest]: know, ultimately, if your current account is negative, your capital account, it has
[Amit Varma]: to be, has to be in surplus.
[Guest]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: So what does China do with these dollars?
[Guest]: These dollars ultimately find their way, I mean, a lot of them, not all of them, into
[Guest]: American are invested in American financial securities, primarily treasury bonds issued
[Guest]: by the American government.
[Guest]: Now, treasury bonds are essentially government bonds issued by the American government to
[Guest]: finance the fiscal deficit.
[Guest]: Fiscal deficit is the difference between what a government earns and what it spends.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, that is the deficit people should be worried about.
[Guest]: That's a real problem.
[Guest]: So what happens is, and China is not the only country which has these surplus dollars, which
[Guest]: find their way into the US, right?
[Guest]: There's Japan, there's Brazil, there's India, there is Saudi Arabia, Ireland, a lot of money
[Guest]: comes.
[Amit Varma]: So what's the consequence of this?
[Guest]: What I'm basically trying to say is that, you know, both China and Japan own treasury
[Guest]: bonds of more than a trillion dollars.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: In case of China, China owns, and this is data as of March 2018, China owned around
[Guest]: 1.19 trillion dollars worth of treasury bonds, Japan owned around 1.04 trillion.
[Amit Varma]: So for the benefit of our listeners, just elaborate on this.
[Amit Varma]: What are these treasury bonds?
[Amit Varma]: How do they function?
[Guest]: So treasury bonds are, as I said, you know, issued by the American government, they are
[Guest]: by far the safest financial security in the world.
[Guest]: And they're safest because primarily American government borrows in dollars.
[Guest]: And if at all there is a problem, it can simply print those dollars and hand it over to the
[Amit Varma]: people who had.
[Amit Varma]: So when you buy these US treasury bonds, you're basically lending money to the US at a certain
[Guest]: rate.
[Guest]: So because there is so much demand for US treasury bonds, the American government can
[Guest]: get away with offering a very low rate of interest on these bonds.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Now, treasury bonds typically in any country or, you know, government bonds in any country
[Guest]: sort of act as a benchmark for the entire interest rate scenario in that country.
[Guest]: So if the treasury bonds offer low interest rates, automatically the, you know, the other
[Guest]: loan interest rates are also low.
[Guest]: And as you know, you know, as we all know, that low interest rates are very, very important
[Guest]: of that great American dream.
[Guest]: I mean, the American dream is basically nothing but consumerism and it's, it's a euphemistic
[Guest]: term for consumerism.
[Guest]: So if all these dollars do not find their way back into the US, the interest rates in
[Guest]: the US will not be as low as they currently are.
[Guest]: So you know, the larger point here is that America has an exorbitant privilege.
[Amit Varma]: What does that mean?
[Amit Varma]: So just demystify that if I can stop you for a second.
[Amit Varma]: Is it the case that because all this money finds its way back to the US and therefore
[Amit Varma]: they have that supply of money to lend that therefore that money is cheap because supply
[Amit Varma]: is great relative demand and therefore they can charge low interest rates.
[Guest]: Is that correct?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So, you know, if Donald Trump starts cracking down on American imports, all these surplus
[Guest]: dollars coming back into the US will not come back to the US.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore the interest rates for American citizens get higher.
[Guest]: Interest rates will go up.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And if interest rates go up, you know, the entire American dream, which I, as I just
[Guest]: said, is basically consumerism and nothing else.
[Amit Varma]: Though I have to say I disagree with the word consumerism.
[Amit Varma]: It's a bogey term, but we won't get into that argument here.
[Guest]: But I get your point that they'll have less money to spend and it will be a downward spiral.
[Guest]: So essentially, you know, so the larger point here is that Donald Trump is basically attacking
[Guest]: at the heart of the system that has fueled the American dream.
[Guest]: And it's a system which has already been sort of weakened by many other factors.
[Amit Varma]: And he's indirectly making America poor again.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Guest]: I mean, that's that's for sure.
[Guest]: That's for sure.
[Guest]: And so, so this was one tweet that, you know, a man, Donald Trump sent out.
[Guest]: The other tweet that he sent out was very interesting.
[Guest]: And this he sent out yesterday at 522 p.m. and you know, read it at 523.
[Guest]: I didn't.
[Guest]: Essentially, I was coming out of a meeting and, you know, some random guy on Twitter
[Guest]: sort of, you know, tagged me on that tweet.
[Amit Varma]: And that random guy on Twitter is listening right now and saying he's calling me a random
[Guest]: guy.
[Guest]: I mean, I don't remember who he was, but yes, so thank you, random guy, for bringing this
[Guest]: to my notice.
[Guest]: So what what Mr. Trump tweeted was oil prices are too high.
[Guest]: OPEC is at it again.
[Guest]: OK.
[Guest]: Now OPEC, as you know, is the Organization for Petroleum Exporting Countries.
[Guest]: It is an oil cartel, primarily, you know, led by Saudi Arabia.
[Guest]: Now, if you attack OPEC, you're basically attacking Saudi Arabia.
[Guest]: I mean, there are no two ways about it.
[Guest]: So, you know, so basically, you know, we'll we'll need to get into a little bit of history
[Guest]: here.
[Guest]: And before we do that, you know, there is some basic, some, you know, economics that
[Guest]: I need to sort of share here.
[Guest]: So OPEC is what economists would call a leading firm model of oligopoly.
[Guest]: OK.
[Guest]: Now, if you accuse me of using big words, I mean, I know when I first came across this
[Guest]: terminology, I was like, you know, why can't they just use at least, you know, oligopoly
[Amit Varma]: could have been coined a little more.
[Amit Varma]: Can I use OPEC in a sentence?
[Amit Varma]: Do you know the difference between water and oil?
[Amit Varma]: No.
[Amit Varma]: Water is transparent, oil is OPEC.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, man.
[Guest]: Sorry.
[Guest]: So OPEC essentially follows the leading firm model of oligopoly.
[Guest]: And that basically means that they cater to a market dominated by a small number of sellers
[Guest]: and within those small number of sellers, the largest seller, which in this case happens
[Guest]: to be Saudi Arabia, sets the price.
[Guest]: OK.
[Guest]: So why I sort of went into this is to tell our readers that when you attack OPEC, you're
[Guest]: essentially attacking Saudi Arabia.
[Guest]: Now, so there is a lot of history.
[Amit Varma]: Trump may not even know that, but never mind.
[Guest]: Let's not go there.
[Guest]: So there's a lot of history that we sort of need to discuss with our listeners here.
[Guest]: Now, you know, America in the early 20th century fell in love with the automobile and the production
[Guest]: sort of went up from around 1.9 million units in 1920 to 4.5 million in 1929.
[Guest]: And after that, the Great Depression struck and then the Second World War happened.
[Guest]: And during the Second World War, all these automobile factories essentially were converted
[Guest]: into arms factories.
[Guest]: Now, once the World War started coming to an end, and this was late 1944, early 1945,
[Guest]: the Americans realized that, you know, there would be an automobile boom all over again
[Guest]: because, you know, people had not bought cars for many years.
[Guest]: And what was also happening was that, you know, American cities were expanding, you
[Guest]: know, all these suburbs were coming in and there was no, you know, public transport system
[Guest]: to cater to these suburbs.
[Guest]: So you needed cars.
[Guest]: So sometime in 1945, the American president, Franklin Roosevelt, you know, realized this.
[Guest]: I mean, obviously, his set of advisors would have told him about it.
[Guest]: And he traveled quietly to the USS Quincy, a ship anchored in the Red Sea.
[Guest]: Here he met King Ibn Saud of Saudi Arabia, the country which was by then home to the
[Guest]: largest oil reserves in the world.
[Guest]: And American, you know, so basically America, as I said, had become obsessed with the automobile
[Guest]: and due to that, this had led to a swift decline in its oil reserves, even though it was the
[Guest]: biggest producer of oil at that point of time.
[Guest]: The country needed to secure another source for an assured supply of oil.
[Guest]: In return for access to Saudi Arabian oil reserves, King Ibn Saud was promised full
[Guest]: American military support to the ruling clan of Al Saud, who still rule, who still rule
[Guest]: and the military guarantee is also still there.
[Guest]: What had also happened sort of parallelly was that in 1944, the countries, you know,
[Guest]: the world had gotten together at Bretton Woods in the state of New Hampshire in the United
[Guest]: States and sort of tried to design a new global monetary system.
[Guest]: And in this new global monetary system, the American dollar was at the heart.
[Guest]: It was the only currency that continued to be convertible into gold, you know.
[Guest]: So you could, countries, other countries could convert their, you know, convert US dollars
[Guest]: into gold.
[Guest]: And I think one ounce of gold was essentially worth $35.
[Guest]: So one ounce is around 31.1 grams.
[Guest]: So this essentially led to a situation where countries sort of started, you know, till
[Guest]: then the trading currency used to be the British pound.
[Guest]: Now, countries gradually started moving away from the pound and, you know, graduating towards
[Guest]: the dollar primarily because pound was no longer convertible into gold and dollar was.
[Guest]: So this essentially led to a situation where the global trade moved towards dollars.
[Amit Varma]: And OPEC also, because people felt more secure, because it was convertible, it was convertible
[Guest]: into gold.
[Guest]: See, paper money as you know, as we sort of discussed in a previous episode is pure paper
[Guest]: money is a very recent concept, which is probably as old as, you know, 45, 46 years, I mean,
[Guest]: 71 was when the link between gold and paper money broke down completely.
[Amit Varma]: And I urge our listeners to go to seen unseen.in where our archives are and check out my episode
[Amit Varma]: on easy money with Vivek, which discussed his books in detail and plus the sort of insights
[Amit Varma]: he's touching upon right now.
[Guest]: So so basically, you know, back then everyone sort of wanted their paper currency to be
[Guest]: convertible into gold.
[Guest]: So and you know, OPEC was no exception and Saudi Arabia was no exception.
[Guest]: I mean, the Saudis love their gold.
[Guest]: So oil was bought and sold in dollars.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Now, this is a very important point, which a lot of people don't realize oil continues
[Guest]: to be bought and sold in dollars.
[Guest]: In fact, you know, over the years, other members of the OPEC, including Iran, have tried to
[Guest]: move OPEC away from dollars.
[Guest]: I mean, in fact, in the late 70s, you know, few countries wanted to sell oil in a basket
[Guest]: of currencies, but Saudi Arabia did not let it happen.
[Amit Varma]: So essentially, if India wants to buy oil from Saudi Arabia or slash OPEC, it will have
[Amit Varma]: to pay in dollars, and it will have to get those dollars from somewhere.
[Guest]: So when oil is bought and sold in dollars, it essentially forces countries which do not
[Guest]: produce enough oil to earn those dollars.
[Guest]: How do you earn those dollars?
[Guest]: You earn those dollars by exporting whatever you have in terms of dollars, and then you
[Guest]: use those dollars to buy this oil.
[Guest]: And most countries in the world do not produce enough oil.
[Guest]: I mean, like the Indian import dependency in 2017-18 was close to 82%, which basically
[Guest]: means that only 18% of the oil consumed in India was produced in India.
[Guest]: The rest was imported.
[Guest]: And when you import, you pay in dollars.
[Guest]: And when you pay in dollars, you need to earn in dollars.
[Guest]: So again, you know, this goes back to the...
[Amit Varma]: What's the implication of this?
[Guest]: So the implication is this, you know, it goes back to a term that I used, exorbitant privilege.
[Guest]: You know, all other countries in the world need to earn these dollars.
[Guest]: Saudi Arabia can simply print money, can simply print it.
[Guest]: So if oil, let's say, is not sold in terms of dollars, what happens then?
[Guest]: Let's say oil is, you know, I mean, they sort of, the Saudi guys come up with, OPEC comes
[Guest]: up with its own currency, okay, and says, okay, now we'll only buy and sell oil in this
[Guest]: currency.
[Amit Varma]: What happens then?
[Amit Varma]: I would name it Kols.
[Amit Varma]: No, I mean, whatever.
[Guest]: They may call it Al-Sauds or whatever.
[Guest]: Al-Kols.
[Guest]: So what happens then?
[Guest]: Then the world does not need to trade in dollars.
[Guest]: If the world does not need to trade in dollars, the world does not need to export in dollars.
[Guest]: If the world does not need to export in dollars, all the surplus dollars do not go back to
[Guest]: the US.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And this again affects the interest rates.
[Amit Varma]: And so there are, I mean, the point is there are implications, you know, which you cannot
[Guest]: possibly even think of.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And we are all tied to each other and if you affect this in terms of making trade freer,
[Amit Varma]: you increase the virtuous cycle effect of it.
[Amit Varma]: And if you actually cut down on free trade, you can make it a vicious cycle where everybody
[Amit Varma]: spirals and gets worse.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So basically, you know, what happens is, and this is again, you know, it all goes back
[Guest]: to the title of your show, the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: These are all unseen.
[Guest]: Because what happens is when we talk economics, especially, you know, political economy, we
[Guest]: just tend to look at the seen effects.
[Guest]: But there are so many unseen, you know, second order, third order effects that you simply
[Guest]: cannot figure out in advance.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So, so again, so the larger point here is that, you know, a precedent of, you know,
[Guest]: of the only global superpower should not be tweeting like, you know, you and me do.
[Amit Varma]: So I don't tweet like that, I'm very offended by that.
[Amit Varma]: No, by you and me, I mean, people in general, people in general.
[Amit Varma]: So Vivek, just to change the subject, when we were talking on the phone yesterday, I
[Amit Varma]: was recording this on a Thursday before the Monday when it's released.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, the day when the football World Cup starts.
[Amit Varma]: And I told you that, hey, do you know, Spain has just sacked their coach, Lopeta Aguillo,
[Amit Varma]: however, his name is pronounced.
[Amit Varma]: And you started talking about easy money again.
[Guest]: Iske saath Spain ka kya connection hai?
[Guest]: So the connection is that, you know, whatever is happening in the US now, has sort of happened
[Guest]: with the Spain, you know, few centuries back in the 15th and the 16th century.
[Guest]: So you know, essentially, what happened was that in the early 16th century, Spaniards
[Guest]: captured large parts of what is now known as South America, right.
[Guest]: And the area had large deposits of silver and gold, right.
[Guest]: So these precious metals were sort of transported from Spain, from South America to Spain, and,
[Guest]: you know, then they were converted into coins.
[Guest]: And these coins were used to buy things, okay.
[Guest]: And you know, the story, one of the great stories of this is that in 1545, one of the
[Guest]: biggest silver mines was found in a place called Potosi, I hope I'm pronouncing it correctly,
[Guest]: which is now in Bolivia.
[Guest]: Now Potosi is one of the highest cities in the world and is situated at a height of 4090
[Guest]: meters.
[Guest]: And given the altitude that it sits on, it took Spaniards some time to get there.
[Guest]: Here a mountain of silver of six miles around its base was discovered.
[Guest]: The mountain or the rich hill as it became to be called, generated nearly 45,000 tons
[Guest]: of silver between 1556 and 1783, which is like, you know, more than 200 years.
[Guest]: But that was the original city on a hill.
[Guest]: And most of this newfound silver was shipped to Spain.
[Guest]: And in the best years, some 300 tons of silver came in from silver mines in the various parts
[Guest]: of South America.
[Guest]: Now once this gold and silver started coming in from, you know, from South America, the
[Guest]: Spaniards became proficient at spending it rather than engaging themselves in any productive
[Guest]: activity.
[Guest]: Easy money had spoiled them and they produced very little of their own.
[Guest]: Once this happened, everything had to be imported.
[Guest]: You know, weapons came from the Dutch, woolens from British, glassware from Italians and
[Guest]: so on.
[Guest]: Now Thomas Sowell, you know, who we were discussing at the very beginning, makes a very interesting
[Guest]: point in Wealth, Poverty and Politics, which is, you know, a great book that he's written.
[Guest]: The vast wealth pouring into Spain allowed the Spanish elite to live in luxury and leisure,
[Guest]: enjoying the products of other countries purchased with windfall gain in gold and silver.
[Guest]: At one point, Spanish imports were nearly twice as large as its exports, with the difference
[Guest]: being covered by payments in gold and silver.
[Guest]: It was a source of pride, however, that all the world served Spain while Spain served
[Guest]: nobody.
[Guest]: Now if you sort of compare the situation, you know, something similar is playing out
[Guest]: in the US.
[Guest]: Now obviously things are not as bad in the US as they were in Spain, but if you look
[Guest]: at the ratio of US imports and US exports, and I'm talking about goods here, not services,
[Guest]: the ratio is 1.5, which basically means that the US imports 50% more goods than it exports.
[Guest]: So, you know, Spain had like, you know, Spain had an unlimited amount of access to gold
[Guest]: and silver.
[Guest]: Similarly, US has an unlimited access to the dollar, you know, other countries, as we've
[Amit Varma]: been discussing, need to earn it.
[Amit Varma]: They can just spend the money, that will devalue their own currency and cause inflation, blah
[Guest]: blah blah, but whatever.
[Guest]: Yes, but over a period of time, you know, even if they gradually keep printing it, it
[Guest]: doesn't make, you know, a rate of inflation of 2-3% a year does not really kill anyone,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: While the unlimited access to gold and silver was Spain's easy money, the dollar is United
[Guest]: States' easy money, and given this, it isn't surprising that like Spain, the United States
[Guest]: imports much more than it exports.
[Guest]: Also, you know, Spain had to face the risk of gold and silver running out, which it eventually
[Guest]: did, but the US can keep running its printing press.
[Amit Varma]: So how did that Spanish story play out?
[Amit Varma]: I don't know how they'll do at this World Cup, but how did that story play out?
[Guest]: So obviously, you know, after a point of time, you know, the supply of silver sort of started
[Guest]: coming down.
[Guest]: I mean, it peaked in 1600 and started to fall after that.
[Guest]: But the spending habits of people did not change immediately, leading to Spain getting
[Guest]: into debts with foreigners and the government defaulted on its loans, you know, in 1607,
[Guest]: 1627 and 1647.
[Guest]: So that's in a sense a crucial difference in that they ran out of gold, the US as well.
[Guest]: Yes, because what happens is, you know, ultimately at that point of time, you know, gold was
[Guest]: money and there was no, you know, gold wasn't unlimited.
[Guest]: The US can never run out of money, as long as dollar continues to be the international
[Guest]: trading, international reserve currency.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me something, how do you see all of this playing out?
[Amit Varma]: You cannot...
[Amit Varma]: What's your worst case scenario?
[Amit Varma]: You cannot predict anything.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, there is no worst case scenario, because something like this can continue for
[Guest]: years and years.
[Guest]: I mean, it can possibly last, you know, even our lifetimes.
[Amit Varma]: And we are, you know, sort of in an age of populist demagogues everywhere who are insular
[Amit Varma]: in this way.
[Amit Varma]: And if you think about it, this is not really a right-left divide, because people on the
[Amit Varma]: right typically tend to be for free trade.
[Amit Varma]: And in this case, if you look at their policies towards trade, Trump and Bernie Sanders have
[Amit Varma]: pretty much identical and identically destructive policies.
[Guest]: In fact, you know, the interesting point is, if not the US dollar, then what?
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Now, in 99, when the euro sort of came into the picture, people started to say, okay,
[Guest]: now the euro will take on the dollar.
[Guest]: But if you look at the situation in Europe, and especially Southern Europe, it's even,
[Guest]: you know, more worse than, you know, the situation in the US.
[Guest]: In fact, the situation in the US has now started to improve.
[Guest]: So how does the euro challenge the dollar?
[Guest]: If you look at Japan, I mean, the country has not grown for many, many years.
[Guest]: And with the number of old people going up and the population shrinking, whether the
[Guest]: country will, you know, what will happen is anybody's guess.
[Guest]: So again, the yen cannot take on the dollar.
[Guest]: That leaves us with the Chinese Yuan.
[Guest]: The Chinese Yuan cannot take on the dollar until China has full capital account convertibility.
[Guest]: Now, what do I mean by that?
[Guest]: What I mean is that a Chinese guy can sort of take out his money from China and invest
[Guest]: it anywhere in the world at any point of time.
[Guest]: Now, that is not allowed as of now, because China needs access to all these savings to
[Guest]: build all the infrastructure that it is.
[Guest]: So if, you know, if money cannot sort of flow in and flow out freely from any country at
[Guest]: any point of time, that currency can never be the international reserve currency.
[Guest]: You know, major reason why dollar is the international reserve currency is because the US Treasury
[Guest]: bond market is extremely liquid.
[Guest]: You can bring in money at any point of time, you can take out money at any point of time.
[Guest]: So which means they'll continue to have a disproportionately large influence on the
[Guest]: world's economy.
[Guest]: So what will happen is, my guess is, since you've asked me to sort of paint a futuristic
[Guest]: picture, my guess is, and this is already happening, that China will work towards projecting
[Guest]: the Yuan as, you know, an international currency.
[Guest]: But that is not going to happen, like, you know, in 2022, or in 2025, it will at least
[Guest]: take a couple of decades.
[Guest]: By then, you know, who knows what else might happen.
[Amit Varma]: So, and on that wonderful, hopeful note, Vivek, I hope you enjoy the World Cup.
[Guest]: And thanks so much for coming on the scene and the unseen.
[Guest]: The World Cups in 2019, right?
[Guest]: Yaar, tu cricket hi dekhta hai kya?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I don't watch.
[Amit Varma]: The US hasn't qualified.
[Amit Varma]: So you don't give a shit.
[Guest]: So in fact, if you're talking about football, you know, the four countries which have 50%
[Guest]: of the world population, US, India, China and Indonesia, are not playing the World Cup.
[Guest]: Immediately boycott the World Cup.
[Amit Varma]: By the way, I went and watched the Hero Cup intercontinental final between India and Kenya
[Amit Varma]: and it was quite excellent.
[Amit Varma]: Next time you must come with me and fall in love with the beautiful game of football.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, check out past episodes of the seen and the
[Amit Varma]: unseen at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Vivek has been a guest on many of them where he's revealed many, many lurid secrets and
[Amit Varma]: there's only one way to find out what those are.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Vivek on Twitter at call underscore Vivek.
[Amit Varma]: And there's another website which might be useful for you.
[Amit Varma]: Hop on over to Amazon.in and you can search for Vivek's books, which is an easy money
[Amit Varma]: trilogy released recently, re-released by Harper Collins in a really snazzy new edition.
[Amit Varma]: And also his book, India's Big Government, which true to its subject is a big book.
[Amit Varma]: So do check those out.
[Amit Varma]: And you can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: Enjoy the World Cup.
[Unknown]: As you can see, we have a podcast listener in his natural habitat.
[Unknown]: Billions of years of evolution have led him to this point.
[Unknown]: He's on his way to work and listening to podcasts makes his miserable day better.
[Unknown]: He will now head to work and use all his knowledge to communicate with other colleagues and possibly
[Unknown]: future mates.
[Unknown]: You can find more of his species on ivmpodcasts.com, your one-stop destination where you can check
[Unknown]: out all the coolest Indian podcasts.
[Unknown]: Happy listening.